---
title: "PhD positions 2016"
date: 
MDFileCustomID: "recruitment-PhD-positions-2016"
expired: true
---

# Doctoral studentship position, one or several, in Computational Linguistics

Type of employment: Fixed-term employment, 48 months\
Extent: 100 %\
Location: Department of Philosophy, Linguistics and Theory of Science,
Gothenburg\
First day of employment: 2016-09-01\
Reference number: UR 2016/335\
The University of Gothenburg tackles society\'s challenges with diverse
knowledge. 37 000 students and 6 000 employees make the university a
large and inspiring place to work and study. Strong research and
attractive study programmes attract scientists and students from around
the world. With new knowledge and new perspectives, the University
contributes to a better future.

The Centre for Linguistic Theory and Studies in Probability (CLASP) is
based in FLoV at the University of Gothenburg, and is funded by a 10
year grant from the Swedish Research Council (2015-2025). CLASP is
devoted to research and advanced training in the application of
probabilistic modelling and machine learning methods to core issues in
linguistic theory and cognition. It also addresses topics in dialogue
and linguistic interaction. For a description of CLASP see
http://flov.gu.se/clasp

\
Job assignments\
The successful candidate is expected to devote her or his time primarily
to the completion of obligatory course work and to write a doctoral
dissertation. He or she may, however, also undertake a limited amount of
teaching, administration or research not directly connected to her or
his dissertation topic. Such duties extend the position accordingly. As
the position is funded in part by a research grant from the Swedish
Research Council the successful candidate should write her or his
doctoral thesis within one of the CLASP\'s core areas and the research
should fit in within the research programme of the centre. The doctoral
student is also expected to participate in the department\'s activities,
such as workshops, seminars and conferences.

Eligibility\
The general entry requirements for third-cycle (doctoral) programmes
are: a second-cycle qualification/degree and at least 240 higher
education (HE) credits for courses of which at least 60 HE credits are
awarded in the second-cycle; or equivalent training either in Sweden or
abroad.

In addition, admission to the third-cycle programme in Computational
Linguistics at the University of Gothenburg also requires:

a\. At least 30 credits from second-cycle courses in Computational
Linguistics, Language Technology, or Natural Language Processing,
including a thesis of at least 15 credits, or equivalent qualifications,
or

b\. At least 30 credits from second-cycle courses in Linguistics or
Cognitive Science, including a thesis of at least 15 credits, plus at
least 30 credits from first-level courses in Language Technology,
Computational Linguistics, Natural Language Processing, or Computer
Science, or equivalent qualifications, or

c\. At least 30 credits from second-cycle courses in Computer Science,
including a thesis of at least 15 credits, plus at least 30 credits from
first-level courses in Linguistics, Computational Linguistics, Natural
Language Processing, Language Technology, or Cognitive Science, or
equivalent qualifications.

The necessary English skills that are needed in order to be able to
benefit from compulsory parts of the course and to be able to actively
participate in seminars and similar activities, are also required.

For further information about the general and specific requirements
please refer to study syllabus at the following link:\
http://flov.gu.se/english/education/doctoral-studies-third-cycle/postgraduate-subjects

Assessment\
Following the Higher Education Ordinance Ch.7, applicants will be
assessed based on their estimated ability to benefit from the study
programme and on the Department\'s resources to supervise them. To
facilitate the selection process, applicants must submit:

1\. theses and degree projects

2\. a project draft discribing the applicant\'s desired focus of research
as well as which theories, methods and material they are planning to
use.

Admissions and selections are conditional on the Department\'s resources
to supervise within the doctoral student\'s focus of research as well as
the compatibility of the candidate\'s project proposal with CLASP\'s
areas of research. In addition to the assessment of the submitted
application the process may also include interviews. For a more detailed
account of the selection process please refer to the study syllabus
above.
