---
title: "PhD position 2021"
date: 
MDFileCustomID: "recruitment-PhD-position-2021"
expired: false
---

Doctoral position in Computational Linguistics 
==============================================

Ref PAR 2020/1484

The University of Gothenburg tackles society's challenges with diverse
knowledge. 49 000 students and 6 400 employees make the university a
large and inspiring place to work and study. Strong research and
attractive study programmes attract scientists and students from around
the world. With new knowledge and new perspectives, the University
contributes to a better future.

The Department of Philosophy, Linguistics and Theory of Science at the
Faculty of Arts has about 100 staff members and a student body
corresponding to about 350 full-time equivalents. It is home to a large
number of national and international research projects and offers
courses and degree programs for philosophers, logicians, linguists,
language technologists, theorists of science, historians of philosophy,
philologists and philosophy teachers. The Department also arranges
doctoral education and development work in its various academic domains.

The Centre for Linguistic Theory and Studies in Probability (CLASP) is
based in FLoV at the University of Gothenburg, and is funded by a 10
year grant from the Swedish Research Council (2015-2025). CLASP is
devoted to research and advanced training in the application of
probabilistic modelling and machine learning methods to core issues in
linguistic theory and cognition. It also addresses topics in dialogue
and linguistic interaction. For a description of CLASP see
http://flov.gu.se/clasp

 

Subject
-------

Computational Linguistics

 

Job assignments
---------------

The successful candidate is expected to devote her or his time primarily
to the completion of obligatory course work and to write a doctoral
dissertation. He or she may, however, also undertake a limited amount of
teaching, administration or research not directly connected to her or
his dissertation topic. Such duties extend the position accordingly. As
the position is funded in part by a research grant from the Swedish
Research Council the successful candidate should write her or his
doctoral thesis within one of the CLASP\'s core areas and the research
should fit in within the research program of the centre. People working
on one or more of this areas as well as their interface, are strongly
encouraged to apply.

More specifically, people in CLASP are currently conducting research in
linguistics and computational linguistics using ideas from the following
research areas:

 

-   Type Theory (or logics) and probability
-   Machine Learning including Deep Learning and Neural Networks
-   Theorem Proving and Bayesian Reasoning 
-   Formal Models of Dialogue and Linguistic Interaction
-   Combining logical and Machine Learning/Deep Learning approaches
-   Models combining language and perception

Applicants with interests in these or related domains are encouraged to
apply. The doctoral student is also expected to participate in the
department\'s activities, such as workshops, seminars and conferences.

 

Eligibility
-----------

The general entry requirements for third-cycle (doctoral) programs are:
a second-cycle qualification/degree and at least 240 higher education
(HE) credits for courses of which at least 60 HE credits are awarded in
the second-cycle; or equivalent training either in Sweden or abroad.

In addition, admission to the third-cycle programmer in Computational
Linguistics at the University of Gothenburg also requires:

At least 30 credits from second-cycle courses in subject area 1
(Computational Linguistics, Language Technology, or Natural Language
Processing), including a thesis of at least 15 credits, or equivalent
qualifications,

or

At least 30 credits from second-cycle courses in subject area 2
(Linguistics or Cognitive Science), including a thesis of at least 15
credits, plus at least 30 credits from first or second level courses in
subject area 1 (Computational Linguistics, Language Technology, or
Natural Language Processing) or subject area 3 (Computer Science, Logic,
or Mathematics), or equivalent qualifications

or        

At least 30 credits from second-cycle courses in subject area 3
(Computer Science, Logic or Mathematics), including a thesis of at least
15 credits, plus at least 30 credits from first or second-level courses
in subject area 2 (Linguistics or Cognitive Science) or subject area 1
(Computational Linguistics, Language Technology, or Natural Language
Processing), or equivalent qualifications.

The necessary English skills that are needed in order to be able to
benefit from compulsory parts of the course and to be able to actively
participate in seminars and similar activities, are also required.

For further information about the general and specific requirements
please refer to study syllabus at the following link:\
<http://flov.gu.se/english/education/doctoral-studies-third-cycle/postgraduate-subjects>

 

Assessment
----------

Following the Higher Education Ordinance Ch.7, applicants will be
assessed based on their estimated ability to benefit from the study
programme and on the Department\'s resources to supervise them.

To facilitate the selection process, applicants must submit:

1.  Thesis and degree projects
2.  A project draft describing the applicant\'s desired focus of
    research as well as which theories, methods and material they are
    planning to use.

Admissions and selections are conditional on the Department\'s resources
to supervise within the doctoral student\'s focus of research as well as
the compatibility of the candidate\'s project proposal with CLASP\'s
areas of research. In addition to the assessment of the submitted
application the process may also include interviews. For a more detailed
account of the selection process please refer to the study syllabus
above.

 

Employment
----------

Type of employment: Fixed-term employment

Extent: 100 %

Location: Department of Philosophy, Linguistics and Theory of Science,
Gothenburg

First day of employment: By agreement

Apart from his or her own third-cycle education, the successful
applicant may also be expected to do service in education, research
(unrelated to the thesis) and administration. The employment is for one
year. It can be extended with a maximum of two years at a time. The
total employment cannot exceed four years third cycle education, full
time.

 

Appointment procedure
---------------------

Selection, interviews and assessment is made by a recruitment group at
the department. A list of top-ranked applicants is then presented based
on the information provided by the applicants (based on merit, quality
of submitted works, quality of research proposal, and availability of
qualified supervisors). The top-ranked candidates may be invited to
interviews (in Gothenburg or via video link).

### For further information regarding the position

Lena Eriksson, Associate head of department, +46-31-786 4184,
<lena.eriksson@theorysc.gu.se>

Jennifer Stråle, HR Administrator,
[jennifer.strale\@gu.se](mailto:helena.bjarnlind@gu.se)

 

Unions
------

Union representatives at the University of Gothenburg:\
<https://www.gu.se/en/about-the-university/work-at-the-university-of-gothenburg/how-to-apply>

 

Information for International Applicants
----------------------------------------

Choosing a career in a foreign country is a big step. Thus, to give you
a general idea of what we and Gothenburg have to offer in terms of
benefits and life in general for you and your family/spouse/partner
please visit:

<https://www.gu.se/en/about-the-university/welcome-services>

<https://www.movetogothenburg.com/>

 

How to apply
------------

In order to apply for a position at the University of Gothenburg, you
have to register an account in our online recruitment system. It is the
responsibility of the applicant to ensure that the application is
complete in accordance with the instructions in the job advertisement,
and that it is submitted before the deadline. The selection of
candidates is made on the basis of the qualifications registered in the
application.

Complementary documents, such as publications/books should be sent in
two copies to the following address and marked with reference number.
University of Gothenburg, Att: HR Administrator, FLoV, Box 200, SE-405
30 Gothenburg, Sweden.

Applications should be written in English.

**Closing date:** 2021-06-07

 

*[The University of Gothenburg promotes equal opportunities, equality
and diversity.]{lang="EN-US"}*

*[Applications will be destroyed or returned (upon request) two years
after the decision of employment has become final. Applications from the
employed and from those who appeal the decision will not be
returned.]{lang="EN-US"}*

In connection to this recruitment, we have already decided which
recruitment channels we should use. We therefore decline further contact
with vendors, recruitment and staffing companies.

