---
title: "PhD positions 2017"
date: 
MDFileCustomID: "recruitment-PhD-positions-2017"
expired: true
---

# Doctoral studentship position, one or several, in Computational Linguistics

The Centre for Linguistic Theory and Studies in Probability (CLASP)
focusses its research on the application of probabilistic and
information theoretic methods to the anaysis of natural language. CLASP
is concerned both with understanding the cognitive foundations of
language and developing efficient language technology. We work at the
interface of computational linguistics/natural language processing,
theoretical linguistics, and cognitive science. The Centre is based in
FLoV at the University of Gothenburg, and is funded by a 10 year grant
from the Swedish Research Council (2015-2025). For a description of
CLASP see http://flov.gu.se/clasp

Job assignments\
The successful candidate is expected to devote her or his time primarily
to the completion of obligatory course work and to write a doctoral
dissertation. He or she may, however, also undertake a limited amount of
teaching, administration or research not directly connected to her or
his dissertation topic. Such duties extend the position accordingly. As
the position is funded in part by a research grant from the Swedish
Research Council the successful candidate should write her or his
doctoral thesis within one of the CLASP\'s core areas and the research
should fit in within the research programme of the centre. People
working on one or more of this areas as well as their interface, are
strongly encouraged to apply. More specifically, people in CLASP are
currently conducting research in linguistics and computational
linguistics using ideas from the following research areas:

Type Theory (or logics) and probability

Machine Learning including Deep Learning and Neural Networks

Theorem Proving and Bayesian Reasoning

Formal Models of Dialogue and Linguistic Interaction

Combining logical and Machine Learning/Deep Learning approaches

Models combining language and perception

Applicants with interests in these or related domains are encouraged to
apply. The doctoral student is also expected to participate in the
department\'s activities, such as workshops, seminars and conferences.

\
Eligibiligy\
The general entry requirements for third-cycle (doctoral) programmes
are: a second-cycle qualification/degree or at least 240 higher
education (HE) credits for courses of which at least 60 HE credits are
awarded in the second-cycle; or equivalent training either in Sweden or
abroad.

In addition, admission to the third-cycle programme in Computational
Linguistics at the University of Gothenburg also requires:

 

At least 30 credits from second-cycle courses in Computational
Linguistics, Language Technology, or Natural Language Processing,
including a thesis of at least 15 credits, or equivalent qualifications,

or

At least 30 credits from second-cycle courses in Linguistics or
Cognitive Science, including a thesis of at least 15 credits, plus at
least 30 credits from first or second level courses in Computational
Linguistics, Language Technology or Natural Language Processing, or
Computer Science, Logic, or Mathematics, or equivalent qualifications

or

At least 30 credits from second-cycle courses in Computer Science, Logic
or Mathematics, including a thesis of at least 15 credits, plus at least
30 credits from first or second-level courses in Linguistics or
Cognitive Science or Computational Linguistics, Language Technology, or
Natural Language Processing), or equivalent qualifications.

 

The necessary English skills that are needed in order to be able to
benefit from compulsory parts of the course and to be able to actively
participate in seminars and similar activities, are also required.

Asessment\
Following the Higher Education Ordinance Ch.7, applicants will be
assessed based on their estimated ability to benefit from the study
programme. To facilitate the selection process, applicants must submit:

1\. theses and degree projects

2\. a project draft describing the applicant\'s desired focus of research
as well as which theories, methods and material they are planning to
use.A project draft of up to 4000 words in which the applicant
stipulates a research domain that he/she would like to develop,
justifies its relevance and discusses which theories, methods and
materials would be relevant. The project draft is assessed on the basis
of scientific quality and relevance to the PhD programme.

Admissions and selections are conditional on the Department\'s resources
to supervise within the doctoral student\'s focus of research as well as
the compatibility of the candidate\'s project proposal with CLASP\'s
areas of research. In addition to the assessment of the submitted
application the process may also include interviews. For a more detailed
account of the selection process please refer to the study syllabus
above.

Employment\
Type of employment: Fixed-term employment, 48 months Extent: 100 %
Location: Department of Philosophy, Linguistics and Theory of Science,
Gothenburg First day of employment: 20170901
