---
name: "Shalom Lappin"
role: 0 
title: "Professor"
profileImage: "shalomlappin.jpg"
hideInSearchResults: true
---
# Research Projects

## [The Probabilistic Representation of Linguistic Knowledge](/projects/smog)

### ESRC Professorial Fellowship Research Project

October 1, 2012 - September 30, 2015

In this research project we are focussing on the problem of how to
specify the class of representations that encode human knowledge of the
syntax of natural languages. We are pursuing the hypothesis that a
representation in this class is best expressed as an enriched
statistical language model that assigns probability values to the
sentences of a language. A central part of the enrichment of the model
consists of a procedure for determining the acceptability
(grammaticality) of a sentence as a graded value, relative to the
properties of that sentence and the language of which it is a part. This
procedure avoids the simple reduction of the grammaticality of a string
to its probability of occurrence, while still characterizing
grammaticality in probabilistic terms. An enriched model of this kind
will provide a straightforward explanation for the fact that individual
native speakers generally judge the well formedness of sentences along a
continuum, rather than through the imposition of a sharp boundary
between acceptable and unacceptable sentences. The pervasiveness of
gradedness in the linguistic knowledge of individual speakers poses a
serious problem for classical theories of syntax, which partition
strings of words into the grammatical sentences of a language and ill
formed strings of words.

This research holds out the prospect of important impact in two areas.
First, it can shed light on the relationship between the representation
and acquisition of linguistic knowledge on one hand, and learning and
the encoding of knowledge in other cognitive domains. This work can, in
turn, help to clarify the respective roles of biologically conditioned
learning biases and data driven learning in human cognition.

Second, this work can contribute to the development of more effective
language technology by providing insight, from a computational
perspective, into the way in which humans represent the syntactic
properties of sentences in their language. To the extent that natural
language processing systems take account of this class of
representations they will provide more efficient tools for parsing and
interpreting text and speech.
